Add udc docs (#954)
OpenZeppelin/cairo-contracts: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/udc.adoc

= Universal Deployer Contract

:deploy-syscall: xref:architecture_and_concepts:Smart_Contracts/system-calls-cairo1.adoc#deploy[deploy syscall]

> :deployer-interface: link:https://community.starknet.io/t/snip-deployer-contract-interface/2772[standard deployer interface]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:deployer-interface: link:https://community.starknet.io/t/snip-deployer-contract-interface/2772[Standard Deployer Interface]
```

:interface-proposal: link:https://community.starknet.io/t/snip-deployer-contract-interface/2772[proposal for the standard deployer interface]
:udc-proposal: link:https://community.starknet.io/t/universal-deployer-contract-proposal/1864[Universal Deployer Contract proposal]
:previous-udc-docs: link:https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts-cairo/0.6.1/udc[previous UDC docs]
:deploy_contract: xref:/api/udc.adoc#UniversalDeployer-deploy_contract[deploy_contract]
:contract-deployed: xref:/api/udc.adoc#IUniversalDeployer-ContractDeployed[ContractDeployed]

The Universal Deployer Contract (UDC) is a singleton smart contract that wraps the {deploy-syscall} to expose it to any contract that doesn't implement it, such as account contracts. You can think of it as a standardized generic factory for Starknet contracts.

And since Starknet has no deployment transaction type, it offers a standardized way to deploy smart contracts by following the {deployer-interface} and emitting a {contract-deployed} event.

> For more information see the {interface-proposal}.

Reviewer: If we do we need to remove the attribute.

> For more information see the {interface-proposal}.

Author: Good catch!

For details on the motivation and the decision making process, see the {udc-proposal}.

== UDC contract address

The UDC address is deployed at address `0xFIX-ME` in ADD-NETWORKS-WHEN-DEPLOYED.

> NOTE: The first iteration of the UDC is deployed at address `0x041a78e741e5af2fec34b695679bc6891742439f7afb8484ecd7766661ad02bf` in Mainnet, Goerli testnet, Sepolia testnet, and starknet-devnet. See the {previous-udc-docs} for more information.

Reviewer: This NOTE should be either removed or rewritten. We should remove Goerli's mention, and probably add the inconsistency in the event (unique vs from_zero) between the two versions

Author: Removed!

== Interface

[,javascript]
----
trait IUniversalDeployer {
    fn deploy_contract(
        class_hash: ClassHash,
        salt: felt252,
        from_zero: bool,
        calldata: Span<felt252>
    ) -> ContractAddress;
}
----

== Deploying a contract with the UDC

> First, declare the target contract (if it's not already declared).

Reviewer: A link to the declare transaction here would be helpful to some users

Next, call the UDC's `deploy_contract` method.
Here's an implementation example in Cairo:

[,javascript]
----

> #[starknet::interface]
> trait IUniversalDeployer<TContractState> {
>     fn deploy_contract(
>         ref self: TContractState,
>         class_hash: ClassHash,
>         salt: felt252,
>         from_zero: bool,
>         calldata: Span<felt252>
>     ) -> ContractAddress;
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use openzeppelin::utils::interfaces::{IUniversalDeployerDispatcher, IUniversalDeployerDispatcherTrait};
```

Reviewer: I think we should update the utils structure to match this URI, it is easier for users.

Author: It'd be structurally inconsistent to have `utils::interfaces` and `utils::cryptography::interface`, right? Would you agree that we should move `INonces` there as well?

Reviewer: We can have a `utils::interfaces` reexporting the modules, we don't need to move the ones we already have, it is just for making the UX better.

Reviewer: We can re-export INonces there as well.

> const UDC_ADDRESS: felt252 = 0x123456789;

Reviewer: Let's not forget to update the address in here.

Author: Done!

    // The UDC returns the deployed contract address
    dispatcher.deploy_contract(class_hash, salt, from_zero, calldata.span())
}
----

== Deployment types

The Universal Deployer Contract offers two types of addresses to deploy: origin-dependent and origin-independent.
As the names suggest, the origin-dependent type includes the deployer's address in the address calculation,
whereas, the origin-independent type does not.
The `from_zero` boolean parameter ultimately determines the type of deployment.

[IMPORTANT]
====
When deploying a contract that uses `get_caller_address` in the constructor calldata, remember that the UDC, not the account, deploys that contract.
Therefore, querying `get_caller_address` in a contract's constructor returns the UDC's address, _not the account's address_.
====

=== Origin-dependent

By making deployments dependent upon the origin address, users can reserve a whole address space to prevent someone else from taking ownership of the address.

Only the owner of the origin address can deploy to those addresses.

Achieving this type of deployment necessitates that the origin sets `from_zero` to `false` in the {deploy_contract} call.

> Under the hood, the function call leverages the origin's address and creates a hashchain by hashing the origin's address with the given salt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the hood, the function passes a modified salt to the `deploy_syscall`, which is the hash of the origin's address with the given salt.
```

I think something like this adds more clarity

* `deployContract` method is replaced with the snake_case {deploy_contract}.
* {pedersen} hashing algorithm is replaced with the {poseidon} hashing algorithm for computing the salt on {origin-dependent-deployments}.
* `unique` parameter is replaced with `from_zero` in both the `deploy_contract` method and `ContractDeployed` event.

WARNING: Origin-dependent deployments previously meant that the `unique` argument would be `true`.
Origin-dependent deployments from the new UDC iteration, however, requires that `from_zero` is `false`.
It's especially important to keep this in mind when dealing with `ContractDeployed` events because this change will appear as the opposite boolean per deployment type.

== Precomputing contract addresses

:calculate_address_from_zero: xref:/utilities.adoc#universal_deployer-calculate_contract_address_from_zero[calculate_address_from_zero]
:calculate_address_not_from_zero: xref:/utilities.adoc#universal_deployer-calculate_contract_address_not_from_zero[calculate_address_not_from_zero]

This library offers utility functions written in Cairo to precompute contract addresses.

> They include {calculate_address_from_zero} and {calculate_address_not_from_zero} to return origin-independent and origin-dependent contract addresses respectively.

Reviewer: As I suggested for the util, `calculate_address_not_from_zero` should have a name more specific to UDC, because this could be also used for the `deploy_syscall`, being the name kind of generic, and the current implementation is UDC specific. I think we should add a helper for the UDC and link it here while keeping a generic one.
